New Tutorial: REST API (#61)
deepset-ai/haystack-tutorials: markdowns/20_REST_API.md

---
layout: tutorial
colab: https://colab.research.google.com/github/deepset-ai/haystack-tutorials/blob/main/tutorials/20_REST_API.ipynb
toc: True
title: "Haystack with REST API"
last_updated: 2022-11-04
level: "intermediate"
weight: 67
description: Create a production-ready pipeline and interact with REST API
category: "QA"
aliases: ['/tutorials/rest-api']
---
    

# Haystack with REST API

- **Level**: Intermediate
- **Time to complete**: 30 minutes
- **Prerequisites**: N/A
- **Nodes Used**: `ElasticsearchDocumentStore`, `EmbeddingRetriever`

> - **Goal**: After completing this tutorial, you will have learned how you can interact with Haystack through REST API.

Reviewer: 'interact with a Haystack pipeline' ?

---
layout: tutorial
colab: https://colab.research.google.com/github/deepset-ai/haystack-tutorials/blob/main/tutorials/20_REST_API.ipynb
toc: True
title: "Haystack with REST API"
last_updated: 2022-11-23
level: "advanced"
weight: 115
description: Create a production-ready pipeline and interact with REST API.
category: "QA"
aliases: ['/tutorials/rest-api']
---
    

# Tutorial: Using Haystack with REST API

- **Level**: Advanced
- **Time to complete**: 30 minutes
- **Prerequisites**: Basic understanding of Docker, basic knowledge of Haystack pipelines 
- **Nodes Used**: `ElasticsearchDocumentStore`, `EmbeddingRetriever`
- **Goal**: Learn how you can interact with Haystack through REST API.

## Overview

> Haystack enables you to apply the latest NLP technology to your own data and create production-ready applications. Building an end-to-end NLP application requires the combination of multiple concepts. Here are those consepts:

Reviewer: Agreed!

> * **DocumentStore** stores the data. You will use Elasticsearch for this tutorial.

Author: Here it confuses me to put it like that. I said "You will use Elasticsearch for this tutorial" because they will start an Elasticsearch instance and then, use ElasticsearchDocumentStore to connect to the instance. Would it be better like this? 👇  
```suggestion
* **DocumentStore** stores the data. You will start an Elasticsearch instance and use `ElasticsearchDocumentStore` to connect to the instance.
```

> * **Haystack** pipelines convert documents, index them to DocumentStore, and run NLP tasks such as question answering and document search.

Reviewer: convert files in to **Documents** or Haystack **Documents** --> just because this might be a good opportunity for an aha moment that the learner gets about what their files are processed into

      - discovery.type=single-node
      - "ES_JAVA_OPTS=-Xms1024m -Xmx1024m"
    healthcheck:
        test: curl --fail http://localhost:9200/_cat/health || exit 1
        interval: 10s
        timeout: 1s
        retries: 10
  ...
```

5. Launch Elasticsearch:

Go to the directory where `docker-compose.yml` is and start the Elasticsearch container. You might have realised that there are settings for haystack and ui containers provided in the `docker-compose.yml`. They are not necessary for in this tutorial. Run `docker-compose up` with `elasticsearch` argument so that only the Elasticsearch container launches.

```bash
%%bash

cd haystack
docker-compose up elasticsearch
```

6. Check Elasticsearch health

Launching Elasticsearch takes some time, so, make sure you have a `healthy` Elasticsearch container before continuing. You can check the container health with the `docker ps` command. A `healthy` container should have a healthy status on port 9200.

![command line output of `docker ps`](https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack-tutorials/blob/main/tutorials/img/tutorial20_elasticsearch_healthy.png?raw=true)

```bash
%%bash

docker ps
```

## Create Pipeline YAML File

> YAML files are widely used for confugurations. Haystack enables defining pipelines as YAML files and `load_from_yaml` method loads pipelines from YAML file. In a YAML file, `components` section defines all pipeline nodes and `pipelines` section defines how these nodes are connected to each other to form a pipeline. Let's start with defining query and indexing pipelines.

Reviewer: `load_from_yaml` lets you load the YAML pipeline into your python script or pipeline object right? If I have this right could the following make sense?

YAML files are widely used for configurations. Haystack enables defining pipelines as YAML files and the `load_from_yaml` method will even allow you to load a pipeline defined in YAML into a Python object.

> YAML files are widely used for confugurations. Haystack enables defining pipelines as YAML files and `load_from_yaml` method loads pipelines from YAML file. In a YAML file, `components` section defines all pipeline nodes and `pipelines` section defines how these nodes are connected to each other to form a pipeline. Let's start with defining query and indexing pipelines.

Author: Hi @TuanaCelik, it is correct that it loads the YAML pipeline into a python object but it is done behind the scenes, so it doesn't explicitly allow them to load the pipeline in this tutorial, it is handled for them already. Here, I wanted to explain a bit about what happens in Haystack when a YAML pipeline is used. What do you think about these two suggestions? 

```suggestion
YAML files are widely used for configurations. Haystack enables defining pipelines as YAML files by using the `load_from_yaml` method that loads pipelines defined in YAML into Python objects. In a YAML file, the `components` section defines all pipeline nodes and the `pipelines` section defines how these nodes are connected to each other to form a pipeline. Let's start with defining query and indexing pipelines.
```

```suggestion
YAML files are widely used for configurations. Haystack enables defining pipelines as YAML files by using the `load_from_yaml` method. The `load_from_yaml` method loads pipelines defined in YAML into Python objects. In a YAML file, the `components` section defines all pipeline nodes and the `pipelines` section defines how these nodes are connected to each other to form a pipeline. Let's start with defining query and indexing pipelines.
```

1. Create a Document Search Pipeline

> As the query pipeline, you will create a Document Search pipeline from scratch. Create a new file named `document-search.haystack-pipeline.yml` in `/pipeline` folder under `/rest_api` in Haystack code base. Then, update `PIPELINE_YAML_PATH` value in `rest_api/config.py` with the new file name. `PIPELINE_YAML_PATH` will tell the REST API which YAML file to run. 

Reviewer: The 'As your query pipeline' seems off to me. How about:
"To act as your query pipeline, you will create.... "

```yaml
components:
    ...
  - name: FileTypeClassifier
    type: FileTypeClassifier
  - name: TextFileConverter
    type: TextConverter
  - name: PDFFileConverter
    type: PDFToTextConverter
  - name: Preprocessor
    type: PreProcessor
    params:
      split_by: word
      split_length: 1000
      split_overlap: 50 
      split_respect_sentence_boundary: True 
```

Then, go below to the `pipelines` section of the YAML file and create a new pipeline called `indexing`. In this pipeline, indicate how these nodes are connected to each other, Retriever, and DocumentStore. This indexing pipeline supports `.txt` and `.pdf` files and pre-processes them before loading to the Elasticsearch.

```yaml
pipelines:
  ...
  - name: indexing
    nodes:
      - name: FileTypeClassifier
        inputs: [File]
      - name: TextFileConverter
        inputs: [FileTypeClassifier.output_1]
      - name: PDFFileConverter
        inputs: [FileTypeClassifier.output_2]
      - name: Preprocessor
        inputs: [PDFFileConverter, TextFileConverter]
      - name: Retriever
        inputs: [Preprocessor]
      - name: DocumentStore
        inputs: [Retriever]
```

> After completing query and indexing pipelines, add `version: ignore` to the top of the file and the pipeline YAML file is ready to run by Haystack API.

Author: This suggested sentence states that Haystack API is ready but actually it is not. If we'd like to remove passive voice there, let's just say that it's completed, and be done. WDYT?

```suggestion
After completing query and indexing pipelines, add `version: ignore` to the top of the file. Now, the pipeline YAML is completed.
```

```yaml
version: ignore

components:
  - name: DocumentStore
    type: ElasticsearchDocumentStore
  - name: Retriever
    type: EmbeddingRetriever
    params:
      document_store: DocumentStore

>       top_k: 5 

Reviewer: This is up to you, but I think the section just under these yaml definitions are a great opportunity to hint to the learner how they can change setting. It might serve as a good mental map from the API reference they can see in docs to implementing them in a YAML file. `top_k` for example but you can in a short paragraph maybe hint them into some other things they could set?

I'll leave this decision up to you and @brandenchan depending on the level of 'optionality' you decide to provide in this tutorial

Author: Good idea to mention API reference 💡  I don't want to offer any options such as saying that "add `max_seq_len` to Retriever", instead, encourage them to play with the pipeline later and refer to the API Reference for that. So, this sentence👇 might come after sharing the whole YAML file. WDYT? @TuanaCelik @brandenchan  

> Feel free to play with the pipeline setup later on. Add or remove some nodes, change the parameters or add new ones. Check out [Haystack API Reference](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/reference/answer-generator-api) for more options on nodes and parameters.

      embedding_model: sentence-transformers/multi-qa-mpnet-base-dot-v1
  - name: FileTypeClassifier
    type: FileTypeClassifier
  - name: TextFileConverter
    type: TextConverter
  - name: PDFFileConverter
    type: PDFToTextConverter
  - name: Preprocessor
    type: PreProcessor
    params:
      split_by: word
      split_length: 1000
      split_overlap: 50 
      split_respect_sentence_boundary: True

pipelines:
  - name: query 
    nodes:
      - name: Retriever
        inputs: [Query]
  - name: indexing
    nodes:
      - name: FileTypeClassifier
        inputs: [File]
      - name: TextFileConverter
        inputs: [FileTypeClassifier.output_1]
      - name: PDFFileConverter
        inputs: [FileTypeClassifier.output_2]
      - name: Preprocessor
        inputs: [PDFFileConverter, TextFileConverter]
      - name: Retriever
        inputs: [Preprocessor]
      - name: DocumentStore
        inputs: [Retriever]
```

> ## Start Haystack API

Author: Tbh, I explained how to run it with Docker in the first version as an alternative to gunicorn so that people know it's possible. However, I couldn't get a stable development environment with Docker (it couldn't connect to elasticsearch, gave errors etc.), which prevented me to interact easily with the pipeline YAML file. Since this tutorial is about how to interact with REST API, I wanted to focus on that part instead of explaining how to run it with the current `docker-compose.yml` file as there are some additional steps there.

```bash
%%bash

gunicorn rest_api.application:app -b 0.0.0.0:8000 -k uvicorn.workers.UvicornWorker -t 300
```

Before continuing, test if everything is okay with the Haystack API by sending a cURL request to `/initialized` endpoint. You can use command line of your computer or tools like [Postman](https://www.postman.com/) to send cURL requests. If there is no problem, you will get a response as `true`.

```bash
%%bash

curl --request GET http://127.0.0.1:8000/initialized
```

## Index Files to Elasticsearch

Right now, the Elasticsearch instance is empty. Haystack API provides a `/file-upload` endpoint to upload files to Elasticsearch using the indexing pipeline defined in the pipeline YAML. After indexing files to Elasticsearch, you will be able to perform document search.

1. Download Example Files

Download the [example files](https://s3.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/deepset.ai-farm-qa/datasets/documents/article_txt_countries_and_capitals.zip) you will be indexing to Elasticsearch. In the folder, there are text files about countries and capitals crawled from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Lists_of_countries_by_continent).

2. Index Files to Elasticsearch

> You can send cURL requests to `/file-upload` endpoint to upload files to Elasticsearch instance. Replace `<PATH_TO_FOLDER>` with the path to the example files on your computer and send the POST request. If the file is successfully uploaded, you will get a response as `null`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can send cURL requests to the `/file-upload` endpoint to upload files to the Elasticsearch instance. Replace `<PATH_TO_FOLDER>` with the path to the example files on your computer and send the POST request. If the file is successfully uploaded, you will get a response as `null`.
```

```bash
%%bash

curl --request POST \
     --url http://127.0.0.1:8000/file-upload \
     --header 'accept: application/json' \
     --header 'content-type: multipart/form-data' \
     --form files=@<PATH_TO_FOLDER>0_Minsk.txt \
     --form meta=null
```

> However, this method is not convenient to upload multiple files to Elasticsearch instance as replacing the file names in the request by hand is difficult. Instead, create a python file in the folder that you keep the example files, put the code below into the python file, and run the python script. This python code takes the name of every file in the folder and sends the POST request to the url `http://127.0.0.1:8000/file-upload`. With the `print(response.text, ":", file_name)` line, you will be able to see the names of all indexed files. Make sure you see the "Completed" text before continuing. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, this method is not convenient for uploading multiple files to the Elasticsearch instance as replacing the file names in the request by hand is difficult. Instead, create a python file in the folder that you keep the example files, put the code below into the python file, and run the python script. This python code takes the name of every file in the folder and sends the POST request to the url `http://127.0.0.1:8000/file-upload`. With the `print(response.text, ":", file_name)` line, you will be able to see the names of all indexed files. Make sure you see the "Completed" text before continuing. 
```

```python
import os
import requests
 
file_list = os.listdir()
url = "http://127.0.0.1:8000/file-upload"
payload = {"meta": "null"}
headers = {"accept": "application/json"}

for file_name in file_list:
    files = {"files": (file_name, open(file_name, "rb"), "text/plain")}
    response = requests.post(url, data=payload, files=files, headers=headers)
    print(response.text, ":", file_name)

print("Completed")
```

## Voilà! Make a query!

The application is ready! Send a cURL request to retrieve documents about _"climate in Scandinavia"_. 

```bash
%%bash

curl --request POST \
     --url http://127.0.0.1:8000/query \
     --header 'accept: application/json' \
     --header 'content-type: application/json' \
     --data '{
     "query": "climate in Scandinavia"
     }'
```

>  As response, you will get a `QueryResponse` object consists of `query`, `answers`, and `documents`. Related [Documents](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/documents_answers_labels#document) to your query will be under `documents` attribute of the object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 As response, you will get a `QueryResponse` object consists of `query`, `answers`, and `documents`. Related [Documents](https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/documents_answers_labels#document) to your query will be under the `documents` attribute of the object.
```
